
# Conclusions

Our models show that with just information on FICO score, years of employment, and debt to income ratio, we can predict whether a loan application will be approved or rejected with an accuracy of up to 96%. Our approach behind this initiative is to explore the potential for discrimination in loan applications, given the data that was available. 

The results of our models suggest that FICO score, years of employment, and debt to income ratio can be information that determines whether a loan application will be accepted or not. Rejected loans tended to come from applicants that are young, with less working experience, possess lower FICO scores, and are high in debt. This makes sense, since the risk analysis provided by LendingClub would suggests these applicants may have a lower probability of eventually paying back all the money that was borrowed (plus interest). 

However, we also saw an abundance of applicants who had working experience, higher FICO scores, and low debt to income ratios still be denied loans. These are the ones who we predicted to have been approved. There are obviously reasons for why these applicants were denied, but must have been from information that was never provided in the data (otherwise the models, using all data, would have been able to correctly predict their fate). This bring us towards the issue with the data. 

Throughout this process, it became more obvious to us that LendingClub is making this propietary data available because they must know that the specific portions of data they provide cannot incriminate them in any way of discrimination or the like. As mentioned earlier, all applicants look to provide the same type of information on their loan applications, regardless of whether they ended up being approved or denied for their requests a loan. But what we saw is that the datasets for approved loans and for rejected loans were wildly different. Yes, the approved loans will have more information (because they were funded and there will be more data on the loan itself). On the other hand, the rejected loans had much, much less information- and this is has nothing to do with the fact that because they were never funded, there is no information on that loan because the loan was never approved. We question why the accepted loans dataset had information on the applicants' job title, their type of home ownership, their stated purpose for a loan, and text statements made by the applicant for why they requested the loan - but the rejected loans dataset had none of this information. All applications should possess most of this information. 

There is the possibility that LendingClub was more than happy to tell us that approved applicants were registered nurses or project managers that owned homes but at the same time were too reluctant to tell us that maybe denied applicants were anything but registered nurses or project managers who happened to live in apartments. Job title and housing situations among applicants were not provided in the rejected loans data set. We can go down a slippery slope of discussing how racial groups and people of socio-economic classes are typically segregated and tend to live with those that are similar to one another. And if LendingClub is denying more people who do not own a home or work a particular job, then there is the possibility that those denied applicants may be people who also live in particular areas and live amongst those of a particular race. Zip code data, even encrypted zip code data could have helped us get closer to the truth. It just so happened that only three-digit zip code data was provided and we discussed earlier how useless this provided information was. Evidently, LendingClub shielded themselves well by blocking out the last two digits, rather than just encrypting the entire 5 digit zip code and releasing the encrypted zip code. LendingClub protected themselves well because zip data is data that could potentially be used as evidence for narratives or accusations that may be detrimental to their reputation or brand.

Information that can help explain why rejected applicants ended up being denied is limited, intentionally and strategically so. The impression we got is that LendingClub were happy to provide plenty of information on approved applicants but careful to limit the amount of information on rejected applicants. The data they provided is data that they are obviously comfortable with the public knowing or exploring. Giving us three-digit zip code data may have been their way of appearing to be transparent without actually being as transparent as we would like. It was a futile and misleading attempt at transparency. We were not able to understand why applicants who had working experience, higher FICO scores, and low debt to income ratios were still denied loans. Our models said "yes" when LendingClub said "no". There was no other provided data that could help indicate why these applicants were denied loans. Was it because of the zip code they lived in? Was it because of their last name? Was it because of their job title? The fact that there is data that LendingClub *does not* provide means it is inherently improbable we can accuse them of anything, because there is no provided evidence for us to successfully try.

Despite having up to a 90%-96% accuracy with our models, we were not able to explain why the 4%-10% was wrong, in the sense that we were not able to explain why those who should be approved are instead denied. Deciding whether an applicant should be approved or denied is not a stochastic process for LendingClub. It is based on thresholds and criteria rather than randomness. The decision making is mostly deterministic. There is an unexplainable reason for why some qualified applicants (i.e. high FICO scores, low debt, long-term employment) are never approved and this becomes a missed opportunity for investors. Less loans are approved so less become funded. This leads to less (or no) interest being paid back by strong applicants. Investors miss out returns. For investors, there are numerous opportunity costs that come when qualified applicants are being denied loans. The strategy investors should take is to look to educate themselves on the practices of their platform's provider, e.g. LendingClub. Demand for transparency on why some good applicants are denied or even transparency on all the reasons applicants are able to be denied. This understanding could be crucial in knowing all of the available options to invest their money; and if investors find out they are missing out on more potential options and opportunities because not everyone is given a fair shot at being provided a loan, perhaps it is worth considering whether LendingClub's values and practices align with their own. If not, then maybe investors' money could be invested elsewhere- where the market is more open and less discriminatory and the options are more diverse.



